[Music]
Tom, you're one of my favorite guests to
have on. Uh your consulting acumen, uh
business acumen and intersection with
SEO is always, I think, a great
highlight for our listeners. So, uh
thanks for thanks for coming back.
>> Thanks for having me back. I think um a
number of podcasts have invited me back
for a second episode, so a smaller
number. So, I I appreciate the
opportunity and always great to chat
with you, Ross.
>> Yeah, I think I forget the title. We'll
link to it in the show notes, but your
pod on I think I was getting executive
buyin um is one of our most listened to
episodes, which you'd think just from
the title maybe is not the sexiest
title, but clearly resonated with people
in a lot of ways. So, I mean, you say
it's not a sexy title for me. I have
always geeked out and nerded out about
the uh the kind of business
communication and uh organizational
change uh side of the world. Like for
me, you know, I've always said I've long
said the barrier to getting SEO done is
not uh knowing SEO, it's knowing how to
get things done inside business, right?
Uh and so for me, this has always been
the the natural evolution of our entire
industry and careers is like if you
can't actually persuade companies to do
things, like what are you doing, you
know? Um anyway, you say it's not you
say it's not an exciting topic, I say
let's go. I'm fired up, you know.
>> Yeah, that's true. Clearly it was.
Clearly it was. I mean, there's no
better time than now as well. like that
challenge has gotten more pronounced as
we'll get into.
>> Uh yeah, though it's good times out
there, it seems.
>> I mean, good times out there. It's it's
interesting times out there, that's for
sure. Um uh yeah, it's an interesting
world we're we're living through right
now.
>> So, I mean, one of the core basises of
this conversation that ties into that is
you wrote this great post on input
metrics. Few years old, but the ideas
are evergreen, uh if not more pertinent
today. Yeah. So wanted to chat through
exactly that post which of course we'll
chat would link to in the show notes but
what is this input metrics idea uh
specifically in the context of SEO and
um yeah let's start there what does that
mean?
>> Yeah um I mean this concept of input
metrics comes from a lot of the work
that uh Amazon did over the last 20 or
so years. um they kind of popularized
this uh what they called controllable
input metrics which is a way of
reporting around um operational activity
that is important to the business um and
is a leading indicator of success right
so some people also talk about this as
leading indicators versus lacking
indicators um the the most kind of
succinct and I think compelling way to
describe this that I found is you can't
steer a car by looking in the rearview
mirror but that's how a lot of
businesses try and operate right you
look at what has happened, right? You
look at how many clicks did I get last
month? How much revenue did I make like
make last month? Like what happened last
month and then you try and navigate the
world forwards and figure out what to do
next? Um, and you're literally you're
driving by looking in the rearview
mirror. And most businesses would be
much better off trying to uh obviously
reporting on what has happened is
important. But layering on top of that a
set of input metrics which are
operational metrics about things that we
are doing right now, things that we will
do next and things that are more
directly within our control that we
believe will drive future success,
right? Um so you know super simple kind
of worked example of this is you know
imagine you're like an editorial
publishing team, right? And one way to
report on success is how many page views
did our content get, how many
conversions did that content drive, and
so on. Another way to report on success
is how many pages did we publish, how
many pages did we update, uh, and in
this you see in the the the screenshot,
yeah, how many links did we build,
right? Um, and now these metrics are not
perfectly correlated with success,
right? You could write a bunch of
content and it could not work. You could
update a bunch of pages and it could do
nothing. You could build a bunch of
links and nothing could happen, right?
And so, so these are not perfectly
correlated, but they're much more within
your control, right? You get to know
exactly how many pages you published.
You get to know how many pages you
updated and so on. And um I think the
core of this is
on the one hand input metrics seem like
a kind of a like a no-brainer, like a
nice to have. It's like, yeah, of
course, we should report on like things
we're doing, right? But the the real
kind of uh secret jiu-jitsu move of
input metrics is that it actually
educates the business on what's
important, right? Right? So it educates
the business on why are we doing these
activities and which activities are most
important. Right? And when I worked, you
know, I was a independent consultant for
for 10 years. When I worked with
businesses, the the thing that I would
see time and time again is SEO teams who
did not have leadership at those
organizations that understood what they
were doing, right? They didn't
understand. They were just like, "Okay,
we should do SEO. Like what does that
mean? What is what is my SEO team
actually doing, right? What are we
investing in?" And um I think it's a
truism to say that executives don't
invest in things that they can't
understand, right? And so you need to
make the work that you're doing legible,
right? And input metrics is really this
kind of methodology and framework for
for doing that.
>> Do you have just from a waterfall
standpoint, let's say you present a
report to these executives or I'm not
sure exactly your preferred way of doing
that. Are you is this like page one on
there? the input metrics is it uh midway
through like what is the framing of this
in the context of that larger the output
metrics as well?
>> Yeah. Um I mean that will depend on the
flavor of your individual organization.
Um a fun fact inside Amazon they have a
weekly business review um that they've
talked about. There's a book working
backwards that you can read that
outlines all of this about the ways that
Amazon works. Um they have a weekly
business review where they review I
think it was a 400page deck um of
metrics every week. Um and so there's a
there's a popular idea inside Silicon
Valley in particular of like a northstar
metric of like oh we just pick one
metric and then align the whole company
around it. Like there's a fair amount of
kind of I think um debunking of the idea
right now you know today which is really
about saying uh the more metrics you
have the the better in many ways right
and the more that you can present those
metrics in ways that are legible and
understandable.
as a respon a more direct response to
your question is like yeah you got to
look back at what's happened so like
revenue traffic clicks and all those
kind of metrics but then also layering
on a bunch of these different input
metrics right it isn't just about a
single one but it's rather saying here's
the operational status for for this
project here's the operational status
for this project here's how we're doing
on these metrics uh and so on um and I
think that um uh what Amazon figured out
and what a lot of businesses have
figured out is if you can make that
reporting format consistent
the human brain can actually hold a
large amount of data. Like you can
actually skim through a large number of
charts and data if if the way that
you're presenting that information is
consistent and legible, right? Rather
than being every new chart, you're like,
"What is this chart? What am I looking
at? What does it say?" Um, and really
getting specific uh on on what you're
reporting on.
>> Is there a consistent
time? I'm sure it depends on the company
in some ways, but I think of the output
metrics and my gut is like some of those
may be quarterly, they may be yearly. Uh
input is that maybe it's monthly, maybe
it's weekly. Do you feel like these have
natural like input is always the weekly,
monthly and then output minimum is the
quarterly or yearly or what what are
what's your thoughts on
>> I mean I think I think there are many
teams that would love to not have to
look at clicks and page views and
revenue uh monthly but would rather look
at it quarterly right because the
monthly has too much variation in it um
I don't think many businesses will get
away with not looking at kind of output
metrics on a on a monthly basis but you
can try um but yeah you're absolutely
right like input metrics I think a
minimum monthly but um oftentimes
weekly, right? They can be uh literally
like a like a drum beat of like this is
what literally what's happening um every
month and again it will very much depend
on the kind of the scale and volume that
you're at, right? Um depending on the
kind of projects that you're working on.
>> Yeah, I'd be curious your opinion. Just
to give you a real world real world
example for everybody, hopefully this is
tangible. We have a level 10 executive
leadership meeting. We've just kind of
gotten this off the ground and within
that we have also two every two-month
performance connections. I actually had
an example of this being inverted where
most of the goals I naturally was
skewing people towards were input
metrics in both our level 10 meetings
which are every other week currently and
then also backing into that every
two-month goal and someone correctly or
maybe not correctly but noted from her
company great experience at Red Ventures
our new VP of PR they pretty primarily
did output metrics like grow department
by 15% by 10% % and my natural skew was
like x pages updated those kinds of
metrics but my gut was like oh in two
months can we really do that much in two
months maybe that's a problem with the
performance review design maybe it's I
need to find some middle ground but
hearing that real life example
what would your response be on that and
how we'd think about goal setting and
those things yeah
>> I think there's a lot of interplay
between goals and kind of operational
metrics. Uh and I think goals often do
get translated into uh outputs, right?
And and a lot of that is because if you
cascade all the way backwards like what
the point of goals is, right? Most
corpor most companies have a a kind of a
mandate to grow by a certain percentage,
right? Or to hold EBIDA to a certain
line or to achieve some revenue growth
target, right? in order to unlock a
funding round or whatever it might be.
All of the company goals will anchor to
outputs, right? So, so, so at the end of
the day, obviously, dollars and and
profit uh is the real kind of yard
stick. And so, goals at the highest
level often happen to correlate with
that, right? You have to you have to
make sure that if you hit your goals,
then you hit the the revenue and profit
targets that you signed up for, right?
You can't you don't want to hit your
goals and then miss on on revenue and
profit. Um but within those high level
goals you need a way to say well this is
how we're going to reach that goal right
because saying we want to grow profit
20% or we want to grow revenue 30% or
whatever it might be um that doesn't
have any explanability for how you're
going to do it right so so the next
layer down from that full corporate goal
is then okay well this is how we're
going to do it in order to meet 20%
growth in revenue we are going to invest
in our content production and that will
require you know 10 pieces of content a
month and And that becomes the
operational metric that you can track,
right? To say, okay, we're on track.
We're hitting our 10% our 10 uh pieces a
month. Um, and so we're hitting our
operational metrics. And there's a
secondary question to kind of
continually calibrate and be like, okay,
well, is that 10 pieces of content, does
it seem like that is driving us towards
the correct goal or do we need to
readjust, reevaluate, right? Is it not
working for some reason? Right? Um so
there's always this interplay like I
don't you know none of the reporting on
input metrics uh uh kind of removes the
reporting on outcomes or output metrics.
um it's more so just uh it's like an and
right like you also need to understand
what is the organization actually doing
right and and I think the failure that a
lot of SEO um teams and projects make is
that we have so many output metrics
right we don't just have revenue we have
clicks we have rankings we have like all
of these things that you can build
reporting around and so it's quite easy
to build what seems like a kind of
fairly involved fairly comprehensive
dashboard but where every single metric
is basically an output metric And there
is zero reporting on what what are you
actually doing right what is the
operational work that is happening every
month right now part of the reason for
that to say it out loud you know your
operational metrics don't live in GA
right so so so you know I think a lot of
lot of especially what junior teams
struggle with is they don't realize that
you're allowed to make up your own
metrics. They don't realize that at a
corporate level reporting on number of
pages updated or number of pages
published or number of pieces of content
that have a video embedded or whatever
that kind of specific operational metric
is tracking that metric and reporting on
it even if that means building a
spreadsheet to do so is a perfectly
valid way to to to then you know drive
all the way up into your into your
corporate reporting. I imagine doing
this on a consistent basis also makes it
fairly easier to get more budget when it
feels like, oh, we did 400 pages over
3,000 words
that did move revenue. If I've been
communicated that over several cadence
meetings, it'd be pretty easy to be
like, "Oh, can we just double that
number? I already have that education."
>> 100%. 100%. Yeah. I mean, and that's
kind of the what I mentioned before in
that kind of like jiu-jitsu move of
input metrics is it's a reporting tool,
but it's actually a tool for getting
budget and buyin, right? It's like if
you can help the other executives across
the organization understand, well, where
are my dollars going, right? What is the
activity that those dollars actively
drive and then what is the connection
between the unit unit economics? So, it
isn't just like, hey, I spent $40,000
with the content team and got a bunch of
page views. It's more so I spent $40,000
and I got 12 pieces of content, four
videos, two infographics, whatever,
right? And and so then it's easy for an
executive to be like, okay, cool. So
like if I spend $80,000
back at the envelope, I can get this
much uh uh out of that, right? But it's
and that sounds incredibly
straightforward, but it's astonishing to
me the number of teams that don't have
that kind of unit economics at their
fingertips, right? And then instead are
looking around being like, I wish SEO
had more budget. like look at the pay
team, they got tons of budget, right? Um
but actually like the until you can have
that until you can make that unique
economics legible, right? Executives
aren't going to give you any more money.
You know, I mean that's a very core
natural structure that comes with paid
is you put something in, you get
something out and if there's not as much
of that clarity of connection with our
organic work, that's pretty problematic.
It seems obviously it's not ever going
to be the same, but it can be closer if
you're using that structure.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I you know I think
there's a lot of situations also where
organic teams are kind of frustrated
where they want change to happen but
they haven't actually converted it into
a way that the organization finds
legible right so um you might meet for
example a team that says like let's
imagine an e-commerce um company and the
the SEO team is saying well I wish our
product pages had descriptions on them
right and yet it's astonishing to me the
number of teams that are sat there and
haven't done the like the business
modeling exercise of like, okay, you
want a unique description for how many
products? Like, okay, 4,000 products.
Okay, so unique description is, you
know, $200 worth of work. So, $200 time
4,000 products equals, right? And then
you add on some management cuz we need a
project manager to oversee that. And
then it's like that's like a business
case, right? That you can say this is
the amount of of resources I need. And
instead of just kind of throwing their
hands up and being like, I wish we could
write unique descriptions, but nobody
wants it, right? Business isn't
interested. um and you haven't actually
you haven't made a case, right? You
haven't actually done the the kind of
business math, you know?
>> Yeah, makes sense. And on that note, is
there any kind of real world example
where you've implemented this and it saw
some some solid outcomes?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I'll I'll use um my
day job. I work at Raptive right now. Um
we are um a kind of creator monetization
platform. We work with about 6,000 sites
across the open web uh in a bunch of
verticals and I oversee the audience
growth team uh around it. Um, and so we
are trying to drive incremental page
views across those 6,000 sites, but
these are 6,000 sites that we don't uh
control or own, right? So, we have a
partnership with these sites and they
turn to us for advice and and guidance
and we have a a dashboard that creators
can log into and and get some uh advice
and data and so on, but we don't
fundamentally own or control these
sites. And so uh for our teams
internally with interactive we're
implementing an input metric set of
reporting to basically be like okay well
the thing that we are holding ourselves
accountable for is creator behavior
change right we want to we want to we
want to count the number of creators who
have changed their behavior because of
advice we gave them right to to try and
for because that would that's basically
the set of creators we can take credit
for right we like a creator that went up
or down in traffic but not because of
anything we said like we shouldn't be
taking credit for right we should be
taking credit for uh okay other creators
who followed our advice and as a result
of that scene increases right now in
order to drive creator behavior change
we have to do a bunch of activities
right so we have to do things like
launching tools inside the dashboard we
have to do education right um we have to
do outreach to these creators and so
those are the things that we're building
input metrics around so we're building
uh input metrics around like
operationally what are we doing as a
team that are the things that are
measurable have unit economics
associated with them so the company so
the raptor can invest right and and how
are we holding ourselves accountable to
make sure those things are happening.
And then eventually obviously we have to
connect that back to page views, right?
We have to connect that back to like are
we driving incremental page views uh for
the rapid network which is ultimately
how uh both our creators make money and
then by extension we make money. Um and
so that's obviously kind of like the the
end goal, but we don't just try and look
at page views and revenue directly
because we too abstracted, right?
There's so too many questions of like
well how many page views did we drive,
right? Like how like were we helpful,
right? like page views went up or they
went down, but like why, right, is kind
of the question. Um, and so input
metrics is a is a framework that we're
using internally to to kind of answer
that value equation to be able to kind
of say, okay, like these are the things
that we're doing. Raptive is investing
in dollars in uh audience growth and
they're investing those dollars into
these behaviors, right? And then that
becomes more legible to the organization
to understand like, okay, great. If I
put more dollars in, what do I get?
Right? uh which is really like again it
sounds basic but again just to uh to
stick with a real example um I've been a
rap almost exactly a year now
>> um I would say it took about 9 months to
to get to a point when we felt like we
had input metrics like starting to be in
a spot that we could actually kind of
rely on and use. Um, and so just to give
a sense, you know, it's like again most
organizations that I've worked with in
the past as a consultant, but you know,
Raptive is a good example. Um, you know,
when you first step into an
organization, it's very common that your
analytics is not in a spot where you
wanted it to be. There's a bunch of
holes in the data you got to go fix. Uh,
there's new data you want to collect
that you don't have yet. Um and so all
of those things need to happen just to
get to a point where you can start to
like you know put this business model
together and use input metrics and so
on. So it's it's a whole journey. Um the
one of the interesting things as part of
that that uh Amazon talks about in this
book working backwards is um input
metrics as a framework should be
designed to evolve over time right um
and so the in the in the book working
backwards they give this great example
of um evolving their definition of uh
instore products right so initially they
were like okay how much traffic did we
get to product pages on Amazon right
because they were basically like that's
what we want to do uh and then they were
like okay that isn't the best metric
right it's not fully controllable by us
and there's a lot of different kinds of
products and they evolved it to how many
page views did we get to products that
are in stock, right? Because they felt
that that was more relevant, more
closely tied to uh revenue and also
slightly more controllable because they
can understand things that are in they
can they can um control what's in stock
slightly more directly. And then they
evolved that to how many page views did
we get to uh pages uh to sorry to
product pages that are in stock and
available for two-day shipping, right?
And so, uh, they kind of narrowed this
definition down over time to be
something that felt increasingly
controllable and increasingly kind of
correlated to what they were trying to
achieve. So, not just measuring
everything because they could measure
everything, but trying to measure more
directly like a metric that actually
kind of correlates with activity. Um,
and so I I think that's a good reminder
that
there's a lot of um I think a lot of
natural instinct with executive level
reporting in particular to hold it
constant, right? There's a lot of um you
know there's kind of strong desire to
kind of be like we should set up our
reporting and then we should keep it the
same so executives constantly see the
same thing every month. And there's a
certain truth to that. But at the same
time, for input metrics in particular,
there's there is a natural evolution of
these things, right? Which I think
really makes sense where um instead of
just being like number of pages
published, you can say, okay, but that's
actually pretty variable. What we really
want to care about is number of pages
published over 4,000 words with a unique
image, right? And so let's measure that.
And like that maybe that's pretty well
correlated with number of pages
published. But again, the jiu-jitsu move
here is that the more if that becomes
the metric, then executives start to
think, oh, so like images must be
important and word count must be
important. So like that that frames
their value judgment of like what's
going on, what's important, how do we
invest?
>> Yeah. If you just kind of looked at this
at a surface level, you may think number
of pages published. I just, oh, I could
just go to AI, publish a thousand pages.
Hopefully they think deeper than that,
right? But that image side may kind of
correlate a little better with actual
quality of those pages.
>> Yeah. And I think that's really like the
the essence here is like you want to try
and map these to things that actually
matter, right? The point of input
metrics is not to kind of put lipstick
on a pig of like, you know, pay lip
service to like something that we're
doing. It's more so like no, no, we
really want to measure are we doing the
things that we believe will drive future
success.
And so we should be as best as possible
trying to make sure the things we're
measuring are the things that actually
drive future success, right? And not
just empty empty calories or empty page
views, you know.
>> So for these metrics kind of like maybe
a VP owns that that organic revenue
number and then generally you'd kind of
com distill that down to a chart such as
the one we're looking at with a lot of
different input metrics by department.
Do you have any general guideline of
like there probably should be one metric
per person and one person owns that
metric? Is there too many of these input
metrics to the extent that we're we're
saturating those or any other thought
process on that kind of individual
ownership
um part of the house?
>> That's a great question and something
that we we struggle with a little bit
here at Raptive actually. I mentioned
that kind of journey of putting his
input metrics together. Um, a lot of
what we wrestled with was having too
many to begin with, right? We kind of
like threw the kitchen sink at it of
like here's a whole bunch of stuff we
can measure.
Turns out that's a lot of data to
consume and like there's a lot of like
you know well why is this number up and
that number down and like you know is
this going well or not going well? Like
it's kind of hard to see. And so um we
have uh after that initial kind of
metric sprawl we tried to you know
sharpen in um and do a little bit more
of that like which of these metrics do
we really believe is best correlated
with success and most representative of
the workstream. um to answer your kind
of ownership question like I think uh
there's kind of two ways that input
metrics goes wrong right um
fundamentally one is if you're measuring
things that have no activity against
them right so for example if you're like
measuring number of pages produced every
month but you don't have a content team
>> oh yeah
>> then it's like why are we measuring this
thing that doesn't correlate to any
activity right um uh the other problem
is if you're doing a bunch of work that
is not reflected in the input metrics,
right? So, for example, um you actually
had it on the previous slide, but uh
things like the number of tests we ran
this month can be a great input metric,
right? It's like it's controllable,
right? We we get to decide, we get it's
an operational thing. We believe that
running tests drive future growth, etc.,
etc. Um but that would be a classic case
of like if you if you're more set in the
kind of classical metrics mindset you
might not put like number of tests we
ran as a metric but then that would make
that testing work stream invisible
right for executives they would they
would have no understanding or no
legibility to to understand that every
month people are going in and they're
running title tech tests or they're
running uh AB tests or whatever it is um
and so again like the those two failure
modes are either reporting on things
where no activity there's no resourcing
planned or we have no projects planned.
Um or not reporting on things where we
have activity happening. Right? Again,
input metrics uh I think a guiding
principle is like if you look at the
input metrics, it should essentially
show you where are we spending our
money, right? It should be a kind of a
complete view of like where is all the
effort going, right?
>> Yeah, makes sense. We had a monthly
scorecard that kind of levels backs into
this level 10 idea and I originally just
it was like, oh, these are all the
important metrics we have. And then over
time we ended up with like 45 metrics
and we weren't acting on any of them.
And then more recently we distilled down
into a monthly scorecard. That's like
three metrics per person. And even that
might be a lot. And the goal would be
>> if you're a manager under that maybe you
have all of your input metrics on a
sheet that are act actionable.
But we don't have 50 that we talk about
as directors or senior leadership that
are pertinent because it's just we're
never gonna be able to act on that
necessarily. Um I don't know where I'm
going with that exactly, but just yeah
that idea of kind of input metric bloat
was a place we got to and then maybe at
the executive level it is should should
be output metrics for the most part. Um
but be able to distill down but maybe
not. Maybe you're saying we need to
ideally we could dig into the input
metrics a little bit at the executive
level with things like what you're
describing. Is that fair to say or?
>> Yeah, I mean just to to like use siege
media as a as a as a kind of case study
here. Like at the executive level
obviously I imagine you care about like
a new business pipeline metric, right?
Like how much pipeline do we have? Uh
how much we closing coming down the pipe
you know warm uh whatever nurtured um
those are all outcomes.
So you want to report on those for sure.
Um, but I would imagine that you you
would pair that with, okay, well, like
how many outbound emails did we send for
sales meetings? Uh, how many like
conferences did we do this month? How
many podcasts do we do this month? Um,
going to show up in your info metrics.
Um, uh, because presumably doing those
things you believe drives pipeline,
>> right? Right. And so again, uh I think
to your point of sprawl,
uh if you throw the kitchen sink at it
and you're like, well, here's a whole
suite of metrics of like number of blog
posts, number of tweets, number of
Facebook messages, number of emails
sent, blah blah blah, like it's kind of
hard to know what's important. And so
over time and with some strategy and
with some expertise, you would hope you
narrow that down to like, okay, the
things that we think really drive
pipeline that we really do want to care
about are the following four metrics,
right? Or the following, you know, five
metrics, right? or whatever that that
those things are. Um, but I think you as
a as a as an executive team, I would
strongly encourage you if you're not to
try and figure out what those metrics
are because otherwise looking at
pipeline merely just shows you like kind
of where you are like pacing, but it it
it doesn't help you know what to do
next, right? It doesn't give you that
predictive power of like, well, how do
we invest more in pipeline generation?
>> Yeah, it makes sense. And one of our
challenges and probably every is like,
do you have a, we were talking about
this briefly, is like, do you have an
owner of that thing that exists? Do you
have enough resources to own that
metric? If not, maybe that metric
shouldn't be there because no one can
act on it currently. Um or you need to
invest in that metric in in in some way.
Um but that that's all good stuff. Like
for people who are not at the executive
level, I mean I I think of two
scenarios. Maybe it's like manager level
person or biasly an agency. Obviously a
lot of people do know they need four
posts or link building or digital PR as
an input metric. Am I like do we are we
consistently they roughly know we're
doing X posts a month or 10 links a
month I would think and then vice versa
if you're not can't speak to the
executive how do you start that
communication of the value of this thing
and that communication structure to not
get them immediately being like why is
Sally telling me we published three
posts all I care about is that revenue
number right if that makes sense like
how do we make that journey
Yeah, it's a good question. I think um a
lot of it starts with
translating things that you want to do
like things you think are important into
uh operational kind of timelines, right?
So, so a classic example of this in SEO
is like an SEO audit, right? Which by
the way, I hate I just put my hand up
saying it out loud. Um I hate that
culture of like of like audits and I've
I've railed against that a little bit in
my newsletter and so on. Um it's a kind
of classical failure mode to be like I'm
going to sit down at a moment in time do
an audit and then compile a kind of a
list of tasks right almost like okay we
need to like fix our schema we need to
like you know uh add a to content like
whatever the the things are that that
you're um identifying
every single one of those
recommendations
should be able to be translated into a
kind of unit economics like like what
needs to happen in order for this to to
to uh be alive, right, to to be done.
Um, and so thinking in that mindset
enables you to to translate the we
should fix something to like we should
do x number of something or like we need
to do, you know, there's 200 product
pages, we need to do this 200 times or
we need to do this for every piece of
content we create and we're currently
creating 10 pieces of content a month,
right? Like whatever that that kind of
unit economics is. And then what that
allows you to do is it allows you to
translate your kind of point in time SEO
audit into a every month value statement
of like well here's here's where here's
how we're stacking up like here's a
number of product pages that have schema
fixed and it's like zero but like if you
report on that every month then you're
signaling that in your in your reporting
right as it goes up the chain that this
is a thing that matters this is the
thing that's important and it's a zero
right now and so we are continuing to
recommend that this is not zero and that
number should
Um, and that kind of like it's a a
fairly subtle shift, but reframes that
like frustration, reframes that
frustration of like, well, I told them
to do it and they didn't do it,
>> which is like a like what do you do
then, right? Like every SEO has been in
that situation. Like SEO is hard and
complex and crossunctional, takes time.
Um, instead of just like telling a
company that they should do it once and
then giving up, you should find a way to
kind of embed that in some kind of
ongoing
reporting framework to be able to be
like, well, this is thing is important
and we still haven't done it, right?
Yeah. You make me think it's almost like
a variant of the scorecard idea. Like
you could have a scorecard that says we
had this goal of increasing traffic or
value by 100K and we need to do these
inputs and we track where we stand today
against those inputs.
And obviously we could also see where
it's tracking and maybe that would also
communicate if we're above expectation
maybe suddenly they'd ramp up those
number of inputs in that kind of
scorecard even externally. Does that
seem reasonably tracking? Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Totally. And I I think it's
um it's it's just that kind of like
relatively simple idea
that I think you take for granted as you
get more senior inside an organization,
which is that everything runs on
metrics.
So, so when you're when you're lower
down an organization or you're not
exposed to a lot of executive level
reporting, it's not really a we should
do this thing or we should not do this
thing, right? or this thing's important,
this thing isn't important. It's like
everything in the in the business gets
translated into a okay in May we were
what was the number right? What was the
number in May? What was the number in
June? And so you got to translate these
things into into metrics, right? That's
like and so like it's that kind of um
back to that point where I said you can
just make up metrics, right? You can
define your own metrics for like uh
simple things like number of AB tests we
ran this month, right? and you could
just log that over time. Or it can be
more complicated things like number of
pages published over a certain word
count or whatever. But like whatever
behavior you're trying to drive like
turn it into a thing that can go in a
spreadsheet, right? Don't turn it into a
thing that can go in a like red, yellow,
green. Cuz I think red, yellow, green is
like that's fine for a kind of project
management status and and can be fine
for like data communication, but red,
yellow, green isn't a kind of executive
level, right? They they want to see a
number, right? You need to be able to
translate that into a like we did 45
this month, right? And we did 35 last
month, right? And and you could have an
associated red, yellow, green, right?
You can be like, you know, our target is
50 and we're 45 or whatever, but like if
you haven't fundamentally got a number
there, like you kind of lack the ability
to be compared side by side with other
operational things that are happening
inside the business.
>> You turn my brain on because literally
our scorecard is red, yellow, green with
a number uh in there. So I think we're
hitting both a little bit. But uh super
super interesting. Uh, one of the things
that I think is a natural evolution, it
couldn't be 2025 if I just don't say the
word AI 30 times in a podcast, but the I
guess you agree the state of attribution
is getting muddier and muddier. So, the
the confidence interval of what your
input is going to generate in terms of
output is pro, at least from where I'm
standing, one of the hardest moments we
have right now. So there's probably an
element of if you communicate input
metrics enough and the output doesn't
come that is confidence eroding. How do
you think about that this year? How
would you think other people should
think about that as we move forward in
this kind of evolving analytics state
we're in?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean
[Laughter]
>> he's just signed and shaking his head.
>> Yeah. The Yeah. Yeah, the the the the
narrator just comes in as as podcast
host size and shakes head. Um I
it's it's a weird time, right? uh AI is
is radically reshaping a lot of
different things, but AI search in
particular and SEO in particular in
terms of uh you know like there was a
great New York Times headline recently
which was um like the recession is
everywhere except in the data and and I
and I think it's a little bit similar
like I don't think page views are
actually nearly as bad as as you would
imagine if you kind of scroll LinkedIn
for a little bit but the executive level
confidence in page views like executive
level confidence in SEO as a channel is
like radically reshaped Right. Um and
and and I think with good reason, right?
Like I think we all we're all looking
ahead to kind of what's coming and AI
search is is obviously going to
radically reshape a lot of things very
fundamentally. So you're absolutely
right. I'm not trying to hedge the
question. Um measurability and
attribution are going to get much
harder. Right. I think that is fairly
uncontrovertible. Um in in a world where
measuring on outcomes is, you know, a
your metrics are going down, right? Pay
clicks are going down, right? uh
year-over-year comparisons look look
bad. Um and in a world where you can't
even necessarily tell what was branded
and what wasn't branded and like you
know all all kinds of things like that
can kind of go away, observability goes
away. Um then input metrics are more
important than ever, right? An ability
to be able to to measure progress on
things that you believe drive outcomes
has to be the way that you do reporting,
right? Because if all you're reporting
on is the outcomes, like you know,
that's that's not going to it doesn't
give you any ability to invest into a
channel to hold yourself accountable to
be driving uh to be drive making forward
progress or momentum. Um now that said
to your point Ross like yeah if you
report on a bunch of metrics and like
outcomes don't happen that erodess
confidence and so like you know there's
no easy way kind of around that in a
world where everything is changing right
except to say uh one of the one of the
nice things about input metrics and I
actually didn't talk about this in the
article that I wrote but it's kind of a
a related but I think important point is
uh a lot of input metrics are are easier
to benchmark than outcomes right So uh
to say that another way, right? Imagine
that you're reporting on number of pages
published, right? It's very easy to see
the number of pages that your competitor
published. And so you can benchmark
against them and be like, well, at least
we're ahead of them, right? At least
we're at least we're ahead of the
industry average or ahead of our three
competitors or ahead of our number two
competitor, whatever the the clearest
comparison is. Um and so like maybe our
page views down and maybe their page
views are down too, but we're still
doing better than them, right? we're
still we're still outpacing them in
terms of production quality, you know,
whatever whatever it is that you want to
measure on. Um and uh and so I think
that really again is like the foundation
of especially in 25 and probably most of
26 like we got to be measuring on things
that we we can measure not whatever is
going to happen to AI search and all the
different platforms and all the
different things which by the way is not
like you know yes we have to report on
those things right and and you know
everyone's going to do a lot of good
work over the next 12 18 months I'm sure
in terms of like measurability of AI
mode and measurability within chatbt and
there's like a million LLM you know kind
of rank tracking tools popping up every
day. Like, of course, all that stuff's
going to be a piece of the puzzle, but a
a lot of that again is all in service of
measuring outcomes, right? Which is
important, don't get me wrong, right?
But but we shouldn't lose sight of the
fact that what most businesses care
about is operational metrics. They care
about like, can I invest in this channel
with, you know, deliberate
deliberateness and predictability and
knowing what I will get when I invest
into it, right? And and that's the piece
that um is is going to remain important.
>> Yeah, makes sense. That's great advice
and uh agree. I mean, normally I would
like not too heavily I know every
business thinks about their competitors,
but not lean in that direction, but it's
a time where it makes sense
unfortunately, at least for the medium
term, it seems like to show you're still
doing a good job.
>> Yeah. and and and and again um this is
kind of tangential to input metrics but
like you know I think best practice is
like you got to pick your competitors
wisely right so when we talk about
competitive benchmarking it doesn't
necessarily mean you and the one company
that that you care about right it can be
like industrywide right so it could be
like okay you know like imagine like a
B2B SAS company and you're like well
we're ahead we're producing more content
than your average series B2B SAS company
or what whatever that kind of benchmark
might be it doesn't have to be just like
us versus that one company that the CEO
cares about, right? Like you can get
more sophisticated in terms of the way
that you measure um and benchmark the uh
the operational side of the house too.
>> Yeah, it's kind of macro rather than
micro Joe is killing me kind of thing.
Maybe not be the safest for sure. So
it's it's been two years since you put
this out. Is there any kind of I mean we
just touched on probably one evolution,
but anything you would have changed or
updated about that or or what's what's
new in your thinking? Yeah.
>> Yeah. if I was going to write an update
to it, which I probably should, um would
probably be based on on really kind of
this like firsthand experience adaptive
of kind of the the I don't want to say
difficulty necessarily because it's not
necessarily um like big P problems, but
more so like lowercase P problems of
kind of like how do you actually do
this, right? And recognizing that it
takes time, right? Like I said, it took
us about 9 months to really feel like we
were starting to kind of crank the wheel
on on this. Um, and so I think helping
bring that to life for folks, I think
would really help them understand that
this isn't something that's so easy to
do like monthto month. You can't just
like flip a switch and be like, "Okay,
great. I'm going to do input metrics
next month, right?" Like, you know, you
got to get your data quality. You got to
like figure out the metrics. Like you
might have to invent some metrics. Like
you might have to start tracking things
uh uh by hand over time. Like just a
bunch of things that you might have to
control for um to kind of put new
reporting in place. um and and kind of
recognizing that that is that doesn't
come for free, right? Like that isn't
like uh something that you just get like
the luxury of doing overnight. Um that
would probably be the the kind of case
study that I write that kind of pairs
with the original post that I think was
mostly kind of like theory and kind of
like the the fundamental concept itself.
>> Yeah, makes sense. I agree. I mean, I
keep going back to the theme of what's
top of mind for me right now. One of the
things we're doing is like setting a
three-year plan to the extent we can and
then distilling that in today's
environment.
>> Yeah. Thank you. like distillate it to a
one-year plan and then these bimonthly
goals potentially the scorecard and like
part of what we're doing with the
scorecard is we have executive
leadership we want to get them
acclimated to those core output metrics
and then bring that to their team. So
it's almost we have the offsite in two
months we're prepping for that for those
threeear goals two months in advance and
then we'd implement probably several
months after that. So like the team will
not see input metrics for probably half
a year. Uh maybe I just move really
slow, but it feel for a big human
organization.
It feels appropriate. Um and I I could
be wrong, but
>> No, no, no. I think you're absolutely
right. And I think that's kind of like
the the recognition of how hard this
stuff is to do, right? And especially
like you touched on right at the end,
like it isn't always the data problems
that get in the way. It's the human
problems, right? You need to get a bunch
of people in alignment. You need to get
a bunch of people's input. you need to
make sure that it's it's representative
of the work that's been doing. You know,
I think um I wrote this in a a blog post
on uh on my own personal blog on
tomchrist.com a while back where I was
talking about like why are why are
executive dashboards so bad typically?
Um again based on a lot of my consulting
work over the years. Um and one of the
reasons I think is that input metrics
are not neutral, right? So reporting on
outputs is easier because it doesn't
make people as emotionally invested.
Right? It's like right like it's it's
we're reporting on clicks and revenue of
course like that's like uh black and
white right everyone like no one would
disagree that we should report on clicks
and revenue right but when you're
suddenly like okay how many pieces of
content over 4,000 words did you publish
this month somebody can be like well
wait a second like I didn't do as many
because I thought they were higher
quality so I did less and you're like
okay but that's a debate we should have
and so like the the input metrics are
not neutral in that in that way the
output metrics And so I think uh part of
the reason why they're harder is because
they're messier, right? Is because
humans are involved. And you have to get
people to agree that this is
representative of what we believe is
success, right? Um and again, I think a
lot of folks in the SEO world, like
especially on the editorial side, for
example, um uh there's a lot of folks
who would hang their hat on content
quality, right? There's a lot of folks
who would say like you got to write high
quality content with not a clue in the
world of how you would measure quality.
>> Funny you were speaking to the choir on
this. We literally just implemented a
seat score. We both have NPS score
collection which is relatively new for
us amazingly 12 years in for our
clients. And the secondary piece that
we're implementing is in our drafts
asking for a 1 to 10 review on writing
quality and also design quality. So now
we actually can grade at scale what
quality at least from the perception. Of
course we need diversification across
several client types. Maybe that the
client's just grumpy, we're just grumpy,
those kinds of things. But that's our
hope for measuring that ambiguous part
because we'd have people in the past
that would be like, I'm doing great,
Ross. Why don't why aren't I getting
promoted? But to us, we felt that
clearly the work was not up to the
standard. And now hopefully we have more
quantitative pieces which not every
person can do but on our agency side
asking for that score in a simple click
a button way will hopefully kind of help
us aggregate some some input but there's
some fear there was some immediate
clenching up from everybody
understandably um I kind of on my side
was like we're going to take that
feedback too give me feedback on
everything we're doing quantitatively
then maybe that helps but that's some of
the stuff we're we're working on on
Yeah, I mean it sounds great and I'm a
big fan of of that kind of measurement
which is like kind of put your put your
money where your mouth is like okay if
you think quality is important we got to
find a way to measure it right and so
like you can't just you can't just sit
there and say it's important without
some way of like you know understanding
uh what that means um uh yeah for sure
um I think uh yeah there's a lot of
folks in the SEO space in particular
that that have these kind of like
arbitrary ideals but then just can't
translate that into anything that would
be in any way measurable. Right? And
again, so a real example um we I was on
a project years and years ago now with
an editorial team where we actually did
a manual uh grading process. We created
a rubric, right? We had these like five
uh metrics and it was like, you know,
readability, actionability, whatever. I
can't remember the other ones. and we
created this rubric and then as a team
we fired up a spreadsheet went down the
list one by one clicked on the articles
on those five metrics graded them you
know one through five um and then that
became our kind of baseline it was okay
so right now we're producing 30% of
content that's like this level 20% of
content this level and only like 10% of
my content is meeting you know what what
we thought was good quality right like
everyone agreed um so then okay today
we're producing 10% our goal should be
tomorrow maybe 20% of content should
meet our top quality threshold, but like
that's a way to translate, even though
we did it by hand, right? We did it
manually. We did it by eye. That's a way
to translate content quality into
something that's like a metric that we
can measure and we can actually go
against and we can report on and and
that's a much more pragmatic way of
managing and far more likely to get
resourcing and investment than just
being like sitting there being like, I
wish our content was better.
>> Yeah.
>> Which I think a lot of folks are, you
know, candidly like doing. They're just
sat there, you know, throwing their
hands in. Yeah. Yeah, Tom, I feel like I
could talk forever, but uh got to
respectful of your time. I know you you
got uh you got some input metrics to go
hit. So,
>> that's true. Yeah, sounds like you do,
too. So,
>> yeah, that's true. So, yeah, where
should people find you? Uh yeah, what's
what's currently on your mind and yeah,
how can they get more of your great
insights?
>> Yeah. Um tomato.com is kind of my home
base for my writing. Uh I've also been
more stuff on LinkedIn if you want to
follow me there. Um, and then, um, the
SEON MBA newsletter is is kind of on a
little bit of extended hiatus, but, um,
the SEO MBA courses are still for sale.
If anybody is interested, they're on the
discount sale price. So, sembba.com, uh,
you can still grab the the courses there
and sign up. Um, and they're all self-s
serve and self-paced, etc., etc. Um, uh,
and they touch on what you what you so
lovingly said was not a sexy topic of
executive presence, executive
communication. Um, uh, but I find that
stuff important. I think it's important.
So, if you want to sign up, uh,
>> yeah, it's more important than ever. So,
you should be tripling those prices, I
think. So,
>> yeah, I I will do that right now. So,
buy it before I trip on Ross' advice.
>> All right. Yeah. Thank you, Tom.
>> Thank you, Ross. Appreciate it.
[Music]